The tasks of designing, deploying, and maintaining security on a network require intimate
knowledge of the technologies involved in networking. This includes protocols, services,
communication mechanisms, topologies, cabling, endpoints, and networking devices.
The OSI model is a standard against which all protocols are evaluated. Understanding
how the OSI model is used and how it applies to real-world protocols can help system
designers and system administrators improve security. The TCP/IP model is derived directly
from the protocol and roughly maps to the OSI model.

Most networks employ TCP/IP as the primary protocol. However, numerous subpro-
tocols, supporting protocols, services, and security mechanisms can be found in a TCP/IP

network. A basic understanding of these various entities can help you when designing and
deploying a secure network.
In addition to routers, hubs, switches, repeaters, gateways, and proxies, firewalls are an
important part of a network’s security. There are several types of firewalls: static packet
filtering, application-level gateway, circuit-level gateway, stateful inspection, deep-packet
inspection, and next-gen.
Converged protocols are common on modern networks, including FCoE, MPLS, VoIP,
and iSCSI. Software-defined networks and content-distribution networks have expanded
the definition of network as well as expanded the use cases for it. A wide range of hardware
components can be used to construct a network, not the least of which is the cabling used
to tie all the devices together. Understanding the strengths and weaknesses of each cabling
type is part of designing a secure network.

514 Chapter 11 ■ Secure Network Architecture and Securing Network Components

Wireless communications occur in many forms, including cell phone, Bluetooth

(802.15), RFID, NFC, and networking (802.11). Wireless communication is more vulner-
able to interference, eavesdropping, denial of service, and man-in-the-middle attacks.

The most common LAN technology is Ethernet. There are also several common network
topologies: ring, bus, star, and mesh.
Exam Essentials
Know the OSI model layers and which protocols are found in each. The seven layers and
the protocols supported by each of the layers of the OSI model are as follows:
Application: HTTP, FTP, LPD, SMTP, Telnet, TFTP, EDI, POP3, IMAP, SNMP,
NNTP, S-RPC, and SET
Presentation: Encryption protocols and format types, such as ASCII, EBCDICM, TIFF,
JPEG, MPEG, and MIDI
Session: NFS, SQL, and RPC
Transport: SPX, SSL, TLS, TCP, and UDP
Network: ICMP, RIP, OSPF, BGP, IGMP, IP, IPSec, IPX, NAT, and SKIP
Data Link: SLIP, PPP, ARP, L2F, L2TP, PPTP, FDDI, ISDN
Physical: EIA/TIA-232, EIA/TIA-449, X.21, HSSI, SONET, V.24, and V.35
Have a thorough knowledge of TCP/IP. Know the difference between TCP and UDP; be
familiar with the four TCP/IP layers (Application, Transport, Internet, and Link) and how
they correspond to the OSI model. In addition, understand the usage of the well-known
ports and be familiar with the subprotocols.
Know the different cabling types and their lengths and maximum throughput rates.
This includes STP, 10BaseT (UTP), 10Base2 (thinnet), 10Base5 (thicknet), 100BaseT,
1000BaseT, and fiber-optic. You should also be familiar with UTP categories 1 through 7.
Be familiar with the common LAN technologies. The most common LAN technology
is Ethernet. Also be familiar with analog versus digital communications; synchronous vs.

asynchronous communications; baseband vs. broadband communications; broadcast, mul-
ticast, and unicast communications; CSMA, CSMA/CA, and CSMA/CD; token passing;

and polling.
Understand secure network architecture and design. Network security should take into
account IP and non-IP protocols, network access control, using security services and
devices, managing multilayer protocols, and implementing endpoint security.

Understand the various types and purposes of network segmentation. Network segmenta-
tion can be used to manage traffic, improve performance, and enforce security. Examples of

network segments or subnetworks include intranet, extranet, and DMZ.

Exam Essentials 515

Understand the different wireless technologies. Cell phones, Bluetooth (802.15), and
wireless networking (802.11) are all called wireless technologies, even though they are all
different. Be aware of their differences, strengths, and weaknesses. Understand the basics
of securing 802.11 networking.
Understand Fibre Channel. Fibre Channel is a form of network data storage solution (i.e.,
SAN (storage area network) or NAS (network-attached storage)) that allows for high-speed
file transfers.
Understand FCoE. FCoE (Fibre Channel over Ethernet) is used to encapsulate Fibre
Channel communications over Ethernet networks.

Understand iSCSI. iSCSI (Internet Small Computer System Interface) is a networking stor-
age standard based on IP.

Understand 802.11 and 802.11a, b, g, n, and ac. 802.11 is the IEEE standard for wireless
network communications. Versions include 802.11 (2 Mbps), 802.11a (54 Mbps), 802.11b
(11 Mbps), 802.11g (54 Mbps), 802.11n (600 Mbps), and 802.11ac (1.3+ Mbps). The
802.11 standard also defines Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP).
Understand site survey. A site survey is the process of investigating the presence, strength,
and reach of wireless access points deployed in an environment. This task usually involves
walking around with a portable wireless device, taking note of the wireless signal strength,
and mapping this on a plot or schematic of the building.
Understand WPA2. WPA2 is a new encryption scheme known as the Counter Mode with
Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol (CCMP), which is based on
the AES encryption scheme.
Understand EAP. EAP (Extensible Authentication Protocol) is not a specific mechanism
of authentication; rather it is an authentication framework. Effectively, EAP allows for new

authentication technologies to be compatible with existing wireless or point-to-point con-
nection technologies.

Understand PEAP. PEAP (Protected Extensible Authentication Protocol) encapsulates
EAP methods within a TLS tunnel that provides authentication and potentially encryption.

Understand LEAP. LEAP (Lightweight Extensible Authentication Protocol) is a Cisco pro-
prietary alternative to TKIP for WPA. This was developed to address deficiencies in TKIP

before the 802.11i/WPA2 system was ratified as a standard.
Understand MAC Filtering. A MAC filter is a list of authorized wireless client interface
MAC addresses that is used by a wireless access point to block access to all nonauthorized
devices.
Understand SSID Broadcast. Wireless networks traditionally announce their SSID on a

regular basis within a special packet known as the beacon frame. When the SSID is broad-
cast, any device with an automatic detect and connect feature is not only able to see the

network, but it can also initiate a connection with the network.

516 Chapter 11 ■ Secure Network Architecture and Securing Network Components

Understand TKIP. TKIP (Temporal Key Integrity Protocol) was designed as the replace-
ment for WEP without requiring replacement of legacy wireless hardware. TKIP was imple-
mented into 802.11 wireless networking under the name WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access).

Understand CCMP. CCMP (Counter Mode with Cipher Block Chaining Message
Authentication Code Protocol) was created to replace WEP and TKIP/WPA. CCMP uses
AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) with a 128-bit key.
Understand captive portals. A captive portal is an authentication technique that redirects
a newly connected wireless web client to a portal access control page.

Understand antenna types. A wide variety of antenna types can be used for wireless cli-
ents and base stations. These include omnidirectional pole antennas as well as many direc-
tional antennas, such as Yagi, cantenna, panel, and parabolic.

Know the standard network topologies. These are ring, bus, star, and mesh.
Know the common network devices. Common network devices are firewalls, routers,
hubs, bridges, modems, repeaters, switches, gateways, and proxies.
Understand the different types of firewalls. There are several types of firewalls: static

packet filtering, application-level gateway, circuit-level gateway, stateful inspection, deep-
packet inspection, and next-gen.

Know the protocol services used to connect to LAN and WAN communication technologies.
These are Frame Relay, SMDS, X.25, ATM, HSSI, SDLC, HDLC, and ISDN.
